In any case, he was not
interested in flat-chested girls who might be mistaken for
skinny boys at a distance. That was not his style.
Even so, he had caught himself having inappropriate
daydreams about Lisbeth Salander, and he recognised that
he was not completely unaffected by her. But the attraction,
Armansky thought, was that Salander was a foreign creature
to him. He might just as well have fallen in love with a
painting of a nymph or a Greek amphora. Salander
represented a life that was not real for him, that fascinated
him though he could not share it—and in any case she
forbade him from sharing it.
On one occasion Armansky was sitting at a café on
Stortorget in Gamla Stan when Salander came sauntering up
and sat at a table a short distance away. She was with three
girls and a boy, all dressed in much the same way.
Armansky had watched her with interest. She seemed to be
just as reserved as she was at work, but she had actually
almost smiled at a story told by one of her companions, a
girl with purple hair.
Armansky wondered how she would react if one day he
came to work with green hair, worn-out jeans, and a leather
jacket covered with graffiti and rivets. She probably would
just smirk at him.
She had been sitting with her back to him and did not turn
around once, obviously unaware that he was there. He felt
strangely disturbed by her presence. When at last he got up
to slink away unnoticed, she suddenly turned and stared
straight at him, as though she had been aware all the time
that he was sitting there and had him on her radar. Her gaze
had come so surprisingly that it felt like an attack, and he
pretended not to see her and hurriedly left the café. She had
not said hello even, but she followed him with her eyes, he
was sure of it, and not until he turned the corner did they
stop burning into his neck.
She rarely laughed. But over time Armansky thought he
noticed a softening of her attitude. She had a dry sense of
humour, to put it mildly, which could prompt a crooked,
ironic smile.
Armansky felt so provoked by her lack of emotional
response that sometimes he wanted to grab hold of her and
shake her. To force his way into her shell and win her
friendship, or at least her respect.
Only once, after she had been working for him for nine
months, had he tried to discuss these feelings with her. It
was at Milton Security’s Christmas party one evening in
December, and for once he was not sober. Nothing
inappropriate had happened—he had just tried to tell her
that he actually liked her. Most of all he wanted to explain
that he felt protective towards her, and if she ever needed
help with anything, she should not hesitate to come to him.
He had even tried to give her a hug. All in friendliness, of
course.
She had wriggled out of his clumsy embrace and left the
party. After that she had not appeared at the office or
answered her mobile. Her absence had felt like torture—
almost a form of personal punishment. He had nobody to
discuss his feelings with, and for the first time he realised
with appalling clarity what a destructive hold she had over
him.

Three weeks later, when Armansky was working late one
evening going over the year-end bookkeeping, Salander
reappeared. She came into his office as silently as a ghost,
and he became aware that she was standing in the shadows
inside the doorway, watching him. He had no idea how long
she had been there.
“Would you like some coffee?” she asked. She handed him a
cup from the espresso machine in the canteen. Mutely he
accepted it, feeling both relief and terror when she shoved
the door closed with her foot. She sat down opposite his
desk and looked him straight in the eye. Then she asked the
question in a way that could neither be laughed off nor
avoided.
“Dragan, are you attracted to me?”
Armansky sat as if paralysed, while desperately wondering
how to answer. His first impulse was to pretend to be
insulted. Then he saw her expression and it came to him that
this was the first time she had ever uttered any such
personal question. It was seriously meant, and if he tried to
laugh it off she would take it as an affront. She wanted to
talk to him, and he wondered how long it had taken her to
get up the courage to ask that question. He slowly put down
his pen and leaned back in his chair. Finally he relaxed.
“What makes you think that?” he said.
“The way you look at me, and the way you don’t look at me.
And the times you were about to reach out your hand and
touch me but stopped yourself.”
He smiled at her. “I reckon you’d bite off my hand if I laid a
finger on you.”
She did not smile. She was waiting.
“Lisbeth, I’m your boss, and even if I were attracted to you,
I’d never act on it.”
She was still waiting.
“Between us—yes, there have been times when I have felt
attracted to you. I can’t explain it, but that’s the way it is. For
some reason I don’t really understand, I like you a lot. But
it’s not a physical thing.”
“That’s good. Because it’ll never happen.”
Armansky laughed. The first time she had said something
personal and it was the most disheartening news a man
could imagine receiving. He struggled to find the right
words.
“Lisbeth, I understand that you’re not interested in an old
man of fifty plus.”
“I’m not interested in an old man of fifty plus who’s my
boss.” She held up a hand. “Wait, let me speak. You’re
sometimes stupid and maddeningly bureaucratic, but you’re
actually an attractive man, and…I can also feel…But you’re
my boss and I’ve met your wife and I want to keep my job
with you, and the most idiotic thing I could do is get
involved with you.”
Armansky said nothing, hardly daring to breathe.
“I’m aware of what you’ve done for me, and I’m not
ungrateful. I appreciate that you actually showed yourself to
be greater than your prejudices and have given me a chance
here. But I don’t want you for my lover, and you’re not my
father.”
After a while Armansky sighed helplessly. “What exactly do
you want from me?”
“I want to continue working for you. If that’s OK with you.”
He nodded and then answered her as honestly as he could.
“I really do want you to work for me. But I also want you to
feel some sort of friendship and trust in me.”
She nodded.
“You’re not a person who encourages friendship,” he said.
She seemed to withdraw, but he went on. “I understand that
you don’t want anyone interfering in your life, and I’ll try
not to do that. But is it all right if I continue to like you?”
Salander thought about it for a long time. Then she replied
by getting up, walking around the desk, and giving him a
hug. He was totally shocked. Only when she released him
did he take her hand.
“We can be friends?”
She nodded once.
That was the only time she ever showed him any tenderness,
and the only time she ever touched him. It was a moment
that Armansky fondly remembered.
After four years she had still vouchsafed hardly a detail
about her private life or her background to Armansky. Once
he applied his own knowledge of the pinder’s art on her. He
also had a long talk with Holger Palmgren—who did not
seem surprised to see him—and what he finally found out
did not increase his trust in her. He never mentioned a word
about this to her or let her know that he had been snooping
into her life. Instead he hid his uneasiness and increased his
watchfulness.

Before that strange evening was over, Armansky and
Salander had come to an agreement. In future she would do
research projects for him on a freelance basis. She would
receive a small monthly income whether she did any
assignments or not. The real money would be made when
she was paid per assignment. She could work the way she
wanted to; in return she pledged never to do anything that
might embarrass him or risk subjecting Milton Security to
scandal.
For Armansky this was a solution that was advantageous to
him, the company, and Salander herself. He cut the
troublesome PI department down to a single full-time
employee, an older colleague who handled routine jobs
perfectly well and ran credit checks. All complicated or
tricky assignments he turned over to Salander and a few
other freelancers who—in the last resort—were independent
contractors for whom Milton Security had actually no
responsibility. Since he regularly engaged her services, she
earned a good salary. It could have been much higher, but
Salander worked only when she felt like it.
Armansky accepted her as she was, but she was not allowed
to meet the clients. Today’s assignment was an exception.

Salander was dressed for the day in a black T-shirt with a
picture on it of E.T. with fangs, and the words I AM ALSO
AN ALIEN. She had on a black skirt that was frayed at the
hem, a worn-out black, mid-length leather jacket, rivet belt,
heavy Doc Marten boots, and horizontally striped, greenand-red knee socks. She had put on make-up in a colour
scheme that indicated she might be colourblind. In other
words, she was exceptionally decked out.
Armansky sighed and shifted his gaze to the conservatively
dressed guest with the thick glasses. Dirch Frode, a lawyer,
had insisted on meeting and being able to ask questions of
the employee who prepared the report. Armansky had done
all he civilly could to prevent the meeting taking place,
saying that Salander had a cold, was away, or was swamped
with other work. The lawyer replied calmly that it made no
difference—the matter was not urgent and he could easily
wait a couple of days. At last there was no way to avoid
bringing them together. Now Frode, who seemed to be in his
late sixties, was looking at Lisbeth Salander with evident
fascination. Salander glowered back with an expression that
did not indicate any warm feelings.
Armansky sighed and looked once more at the folder she
had placed on his desk labelled CARL MIKAEL
BLOMKVIST. The name was followed by a social security
number, neatly printed on the cover. He said the name out
loud. Herr Frode snapped out of his bewitched state and
turned to Armansky.
“So what can you tell me about Mikael Blomkvist?” he said.
“This is Ms. Salander, who prepared the report.” Armansky
hesitated a second and then went on with a smile that was
intended to engender confidence, but which seemed
helplessly apologetic. “Don’t be fooled by her youth. She is
our absolute best researcher.”
“I’m persuaded of that,” Frode said in a dry tone that hinted
at the opposite. “Tell me what she found out.”
It was clear that Frode had no idea how to act towards
Salander. He resorted to directing the question to Armansky,
as if she had not been in the room. Salander blew a big
bubble with her gum. Before Armansky could answer, she
said, “Could you ask the client whether he would prefer the
long or the short version?”
There was a brief, embarrassed silence before Frode finally
turned to Salander and tried to repair the damage by
assuming a friendly, avuncular tone.
“I would be grateful if the young lady would give me a
verbal summary of the results.”
For a moment her expression was so surprisingly hostile that
it sent a cold shiver down Frode’s spine. Then just as quickly
her expression softened and Frode wondered whether he
had imagined that look. When she began to speak she
sounded like a civil servant.
“Allow me to say first that this was not a very complicated
assignment, apart from the fact that the description of the
task itself was somewhat vague. You wanted to know
‘everything that could be dug up’ about him, but gave no
indication of whether there were anything in particular you
were looking for. For this reason it’s something of a
potpourri of his life. The report is 193 pages long, but 120
pages are copies of articles he wrote or press clippings.
Blomkvist is a public person with few secrets and not very
much to hide.”
“But he does have some secrets?” Frode said.
“Everyone has secrets,” she replied neutrally. “It’s just a
matter of finding out what they are.”
“Let’s hear.”
“Mikael Blomkvist was born on January 18, 1960, which
makes him forty-two years old. He was born in Borlänge but
has never lived there. His parents, Kurt and Anita
Blomkvist, were around thirty-five when the child was born.
Both have since died. His father was a machinery installer
and moved around a good deal. His mother, as far as I could
see, was never anything but a housewife. The family moved
house to Stockholm when Mikael started school. He has a
sister three years younger named Annika who is a lawyer.
He also has some cousins, both male and female. Were you
planning to serve coffee?”
This last was directed at Armansky, who hastily pumped
three cups of coffee from the thermos he had ordered for the
meeting. He motioned for Salander to go on.
“So in 1966 the family lived in Lilla Essingen. Blomkvist
went to school first in Blomma and then to prep school on
Kungsholmen. He had decent graduating marks—there are
copies in the folder. During his prep school days he studied
music and played bass in a rock band named Bootstrap,
which actually put out a single that was played on the radio
in the summer of 1979. After prep school he worked as a
ticket collector in the tunnelbana, saved some money, and
travelled abroad. He was away for a year, mostly bumming
around Asia—India, Thailand—and a swing down to
Australia. He began studying to be a journalist in Stockholm
when he was twenty-one, but interrupted his studies after
the first year to do his military service as a rifleman in
Kiruna in Lapland. It was some sort of macho unit, and he
left with good marks. After military service he completed his
journalism degree and has worked in the field ever since.
How detailed do you want me to be?”
“Just tell what you think is important.”
“He comes off a little like Practical Pig in The Three Little
Pigs. So far he has been an excellent journalist. In the eighties
he had a lot of temporary jobs, first in the provincial press
and then in Stockholm. There’s a list. His breakthrough came
with the story about the Bear Gang—the bank robbers he
identified.”
“Kalle Blomkvist.”
“He hates the nickname, which is understandable.
Somebody’d get a fat lip if they ever called me Pippi
Longstocking on a newspaper placard.”
She cast a dark look at Armansky, who swallowed hard. On
more than one occasion he had thought of Salander as
precisely Pippi Longstocking. He waved for her to get on
with it.
“One source declares that up to then he wanted to be a crime
reporter—and he interned as one at an evening paper. But
he has become known for his work as a political and
financial reporter. He has primarily been a freelancer, with
one full-time position at an evening paper in the late
eighties. He left in 1990 when he helped start the monthly
magazine Millennium. The magazine began as a real
outsider, without any big publishing company to hold its
hand. Its circulation has grown and today is 21,000 copies
monthly. The editorial office is on Götgatan only a few
blocks from here.”
“A left-wing magazine.”
“That depends on how you define the concept ‘left-wing.’
Millennium is generally viewed as critical of society, but I’m
guessing the anarchists think it’s a wimpy bourgeois crap
magazine along the lines of Arena or Ordfront, while the
Moderate Students Association probably thinks that the
editors are all Bolsheviks. There is nothing to indicate that
Blomkvist has ever been active politically, even during the
left-wing wave when he was going to prep school. While he
was plugging away at the School of Journalism he was living
with a girl who at the time was active in the Syndicalists and
today sits in Parliament as a representative of the Left party.
He seems to have been given the left-wing stamp primarily
because as a financial journalist he specialises in
investigative reporting about corruption and shady
transactions in the corporate world. He has done some
devastating individual portraits of captains of industry and
politicians—which were most likely well deserved—and
caused a number of resignations and legal repercussions.
The most well-known was the Arboga affair, which resulted
in the forced resignation of a Conservative politician and the
sentencing of a former councillor to a year in prison for
embezzlement. Calling attention to crimes can hardly be
considered an indication that someone is left-wing.”
“I understand what you mean. What else?”
“He has written two books. One about the Arboga affair and
one about financial journalism entitled The Knights
Templar, which came out three years ago. I haven’t read the
book, but judging from the reviews it seems to have been
controversial. It prompted a good deal of debate in the
media.”
“Money?” Frode said.
“He’s not rich, but he’s not starving. Income tax returns are
attached to the report. He has about 250,000 SEK in the bank,
in both a retirement fund and a savings account. He has an
account of around 100,000 kronor that he uses as cash for
working expenses, travel and such. He owns a co-op
apartment that’s paid off—700 square feet on
Bellmansgatan—and he has no loans or debts. He has one
other asset—some property in Sandhamn out in the
archipelago. It’s a cottage of 270 square feet, furnished as a
summer cabin and by the water, right in the most attractive
part of the village. Apparently an uncle of his bought it in
the forties, when such things were still possible for normal
mortals, and the cabin ended up in Blomkvist’s hands. They
divided things up so that his sister got the parents’
apartment in Lilla Essingen and Blomkvist got the cabin. I
have no idea what it might be worth today—certainly a few
million—but on the other hand he doesn’t seem to want to
sell, and he goes out to Sandhamn fairly often.”
“Income?”
“He’s part owner of Millennium, but he only takes out about
12,000 in salary each month. The rest he earns from his
freelance jobs—the total varies. He had a big year three years
ago when he took in around 450,000. Last year he only made
120,000 from freelance jobs.”
“He has to pay 150,000 in taxes in addition to lawyer’s fees,
et cetera,” Frode said. “Let’s assume that the total is rather
high. He’ll also be losing money while serving his gaol
term.”
“Which means that he’s going to be cleaned out,” Salander
said.
“Is he honest?”
“That’s his trust capital, so to speak. His image is to appear
as the guardian of robust morality as opposed to the
business world, and he is invited pretty regularly to
pontificate on television.”
“There probably isn’t much left of that capital after his
conviction today,” Frode said.
“I don’t want to claim that I know exactly what demands are
made on a journalist, but after this setback it will probably
be a long time before Master Detective Blomkvist wins the
Grand Prize for Journalism. He’s really made a fool of
himself this time,” Salander said. “If I may make a personal
comment…”
Armansky opened his eyes wide. In the years Salander had
worked for him, she had never made a single personal
comment in an investigation of an individual. Bone-dry facts
were all that mattered to her.
“It wasn’t part of my assignment to look at the question of
fact in the Wennerström affair, but I did follow the trial and
have to admit that I was actually flabbergasted. The thing
felt wrong, and it’s totally…out of character for Mikael
Blomkvist to publish something that seems to be so off the
wall.”
Salander scratched her neck. Frode looked patient.
Armansky wondered whether he might be mistaken or
whether Salander really was unsure how to continue. The
Salander he knew was never unsure or hesitant. Finally she
seemed to make up her mind.
“Quite off the record, so to speak…I haven’t studied the
Wennerström affair properly, but I really think that Mikael
Blomkvist was set up. I think there’s something totally
different in this story than what the court’s verdict is
indicating.”
The lawyer scrutinised Salander with searching eyes, and
Armansky noticed that for the first time since she began her
report, the client was showing more than a polite interest.
He made a mental note that the Wennerström affair held a
certain interest for Frode. Correction, Armansky thought at
once, Frode was not interested in the Wennerström affair—it
was when Salander hinted that Blomkvist was set up that
Frode reacted.
“How do you mean, exactly?” Frode said.
“It’s speculation on my part, but I’m convinced that
someone tricked him.”
“And what makes you think so?”
“Everything in Blomkvist’s background shows that he’s a
very careful reporter. Every controversial revelation he
published before was always well documented. I went to
court one day and listened. He seemed to have given up
without a fight. That doesn’t accord with his character at all.
If we are to believe the court, he made up a story about
Wennerström without a shred of evidence and published it
like some sort of journalistic suicide bomber. That’s simply
not Blomkvist’s style.”
“So what do you think happened?”
“I can only guess. Blomkvist believed in his story, but
something happened along the way and the information
turned out to be false. This in turn means that the source was
someone he trusted or that someone deliberately fed him
false information—which sounds improbably complicated.
The alternative is that he was subjected to such a serious
threat that he threw in the towel and would rather be seen as
an incompetent idiot than fight back. But I’m just
speculating, as I said.”
When Salander made an attempt to continue her account,
Frode held up his hand. He sat for a moment, drumming his
fingers on the armrest of his chair before he hesitantly
turned to her again.
“If we should decide to engage you to unravel the truth in
the Wennerström affair…how much chance is there that
you’d find out anything?”
“I can’t answer that. There may not be anything to find.”
“But would you be willing to make an attempt?”
She shrugged. “It’s not my place to decide. I work for Herr
Armansky, and he decides what jobs he wants to assign to
me. And then it depends what sort of information you’re
looking for.”
“Let me put it this way…and I take it that we’re speaking in
confidence?” Armansky nodded. “I don’t know anything
about this particular matter, but I do know beyond any
doubt that in other situations Wennerström has acted
dishonestly. The Wennerström case has seriously affected
Mikael Blomkvist’s life, and I have an interest in discerning
whether there’s anything in your speculations.”
The conversation had taken an unexpected turn, and
Armansky was instantly on the alert. What Frode was asking
was for Milton Security to poke around in a case that had
already been concluded. A case in which there may have
been some sort of threat to the man Blomkvist, and if they
took this on, Milton would risk colliding with
Wennerström’s regiment of lawyers. Armansky was not in
the least comforted by the thought of turning Salander loose
in such a situation, like a cruise missile out of control.
It was not merely a matter of concern for the company.
Salander had made plain that she did not want Armansky to
act as some sort of worried stepfather, and since their
agreement he had been careful never to behave like one, but
in reality he would never stop worrying about her. He
sometimes caught himself comparing Salander to his
daughters. He considered himself a good father who did not
interfere unnecessarily in their lives. But he knew that he
would not tolerate it if his daughters behaved like Salander
or lived the life she led.
In the depths of his Croatian—or possibly Bosnian or
Armenian—heart he had never been able to shed the
conviction that Salander’s life was heading for disaster. She
seemed the perfect victim for anyone who wished her ill,
and he dreaded the morning he would be awakened by the
news that someone had done her harm.
“An investigation of this kind could get expensive,”
Armansky said, issuing a warning so as to gauge the
seriousness of Frode’s inquiry.
“Then we’ll set a ceiling,” Frode said. “I don’t demand the
impossible, but it’s obvious that your colleague, just as you
assured me, is exceedingly competent.”
“Salander?” Armansky said, turning to her with a raised
eyebrow.
“I’m not working on anything else right now.”
“OK. But I want us to be in agreement about the constraints
of the job. Let’s hear the rest of your report.”
“There isn’t much more apart from his private life. In 1986
he married Monica Abrahamsson and the same year they
had a daughter, Pernilla. The marriage didn’t last; they were
divorced in 1991. Abrahamsson has remarried, but they
seem to be friends still. The daughter lives with her mother
and doesn’t see Blomkvist often.”
Frode asked for more coffee and then turned to Salander.
“You said that everyone has secrets. Did you find any?”
“I meant that all people have things they consider to be
private and that they don’t go around airing in public.
Blomkvist is obviously a big hit with women. He’s had
several love affairs and a great many casual flings. But one
person has kept turning up in his life over the years, and it’s
an unusual relationship.”
“In what way?”
“Erika Berger, editor in chief of Millennium: upper-class girl,
Swedish mother, Belgian father resident in Sweden. Berger
and Blomkvist met in journalism school and have had an onand-off relationship ever since.”
“That may not be so unusual,” Frode said.
“No, possibly not. But Berger happens to be married to the
artist Greger Beckman, a minor celebrity who has done a lot
of terrible things in public venues.”
“So she’s unfaithful.”
“Beckman knows about their relationship. It’s a situation
apparently accepted by all parties concerned. Sometimes she
sleeps at Blomkvist’s and sometimes at home. I don’t know
exactly how it works, but it was probably a contributing
factor to the breakup of Blomkvist’s marriage to
Abrahamsson.” 
