Steve Smiley swung open the door to his townhome and said, “That didn’t

take long. I went to the Academy on Friday and here you are on Tuesday.

Were you followed?”

“No.” Heather brushed past him and said, “It took a brisk walk, a ride on a

bus, and an Uber driver with dreams of a NASCAR career, but I lost him. How

did you know?”

“I guessed, but it was an educated guess. You being out of breath and the six insistent bangs on the door led me to believe—”

With hands tented on her hips, she interrupted. “Let’s get something straight right now. Can you see, or are you really blind?”

“I can tell day from night, but that’s all.” He continued to speak as he ambled back to his recliner. “Dark, rainy days are a real pain. I’m not crazy about winter, either.”

Steve  settled  himself  in  a  recliner  covered  with  a  garish  tartan  plaid  fabric and raised his feet with the pull of a wooden handle. She asked, “Do you know your recliner clashes with the okra-colored couch?”

“Looks  fine  to  me,”  he  replied.  “Why  don’t  you  go  ahead  and  make  a  lap around the place? I know you want to check it out to see if it meets your need.

It’ll  save  you  from  making  up  an  excuse  to  use  the  bathroom.”  He  paused.

“Correction:  you  also  want  to  check  me  out,  and  you  plan  on  doing  that  by giving the place a once-over. Help yourself.”

“Thanks. But the need of a bathroom is no ruse. The tall mocha latte I drank on the bus was a mistake.”

Steve pointed toward the hall. “First door on the right. Both bedrooms have

full baths. Take your time looking around. If you’re considering moving in you might as well know all there is to know.”

“The  shopping  bags  were  too  obvious.  You  must  have  heard  the  paper crinkle when I set them down.”

“Bags  instead  of  a  suitcase.  Smart,  considering  someone  is  tailing  you.  Of course, there’s much more we need to discuss and clarify before we each reach a decision.”

“Agreed.”

Heather  made  her  way  through  each  room.  She  took  in  all  she  could  and considered what it would be like living with a blind man who had a better idea of what surrounded him than most sighted people. The townhome appeared new, as

did the beds, dressers, washer and dryer, furniture, everything. Blank walls. Only one  photo  adorned  a  nightstand  in  Smiley’s  bedroom.  She  picked  it  up  and studied  the  face  of  a  middle-age  woman  with  kind  eyes  that  held  a  dash  of mischief. Her smile looked genuine, the kind that didn’t have to be manufactured for  a  photo.  She  wore  a  skewed  baseball  cap  over  blond  hair  brushing  her shoulders. In the photo the joy of Steve Smiley’s life stood before an easel, one eye squinted, as if searching for the right perspective or blend of colors.

“So you’re Maggie,” said Heather in a whisper. “I think I would have liked

you.”

She  continued  through  the  townhome,  opening  every  drawer,  medicine

cabinet,  and  closet.  She  even  looked  in  the  washer  and  dryer,  searching everywhere she could to gather clues as to the character of this man named Steve Smiley.  Experience  had  taught  her  people’s  possessions,  especially  what  was hidden, give you a window into their lives.

Everything had a new smell to it. No trace of cigarettes, pipe, or, thank the Lord, her grandfather’s cigars and the accompanying plumes of smoke forming a cloud around his gray head. A single, lonely bottle of beer stood in a near-empty refrigerator.  The  search  revealed  no  hard  liquor  or  wine  and  no  collection  of

empty bottles in the trash. She repeated her floor-to-ceiling search of the kitchen, ending at a pitifully stocked pantry.

He spoke from the comfort of his chair. “Did it meet your approval?”

Heather  settled  herself  on  the  couch.  “Quite  satisfactory,  except  for  the pantry. You don’t cook much, do you?”

“I’m big on calling Grub Hub.” Smiley cleared his throat. “I’ll go first. Then it  will  be  your  turn  to  bare  your  soul.  Two  years  ago  this  past  Saturday, Maggie… I take it you had a good look at Maggie’s picture?”

“I did. Beautiful, with adventure in her eyes. You were a lucky man to have

her.”

Steve  nodded  an  affirmation.  “Anyway,  Maggie  and  I  were  leaving  an  art exhibit at a small gallery near downtown Houston. We had to park some distance away.  I  was  armed  and  didn’t  think  anything  about  walking  into  a  dimly-lit parking  lot  at  night.  Two  homeless  women  and  a  man  approached,  seeking  a hand-out. They were high as a kite, aggressive, and demanding. I never saw the second man. He took me out with the fat end of a broken pool cue. He then used it on Maggie. I lost my sight. Maggie died.”

Steve leaned forward as if he were conducting an interrogation. “The cop in

you wants to know if I’m seeking revenge.”

“You read my mind.”

“The answer is ‘no.’” He settled back in his chair. “All four were caught and punished,  if  you  can  call  it  punishment.  It’s  a  story  you’ve  heard  a  thousand times.  No  reliable  witness  to  identify  them.  That’s  one  of  the  many disadvantages of being blind. I couldn’t point at them and say, ‘Yes, I recognize that  one.’  If  they  hadn’t  been  caught  with  my  gun  and  our  cell  phones  they would have walked. As it was, all the D.A. could prove was possession of stolen property. They pled out to three years. Probated sentences, of course.”

Indignation  that  comes  from  gross  injustice  rose  up  in  Heather.  It  didn’t happen often, but when it did her Scottish temper boiled like a cauldron. “Why don’t you want real justice?”

Steve  took  in  a  deep  breath  and  released  it  slowly  through  his  nose.  “Two reasons. The first is I’m getting it—slowly. A couple of years in the dark gives

you plenty of time to think. Sure, I could arrange a hit on them, but would that bring Maggie back? Besides, like I said, justice is being doled out slowly. One of the women is already dead from an overdose. The guy who killed Maggie didn’t

last  long  on  the  streets.  He’s  serving  a  sixty-year  sentence  for  murder  with  a deadly weapon. His chances of being buried in the prison cemetery are good.”

“What about the other two?”

Steve shrugged. “Remains to be seen. They sowed some bad seeds. I’m sure

they’ll reap a harvest sooner or later.”

“And the second reason?” asked Heather.

“Simple. Maggie wouldn’t want me to.”

“If that’s not why you want me, it must be because of Ned Logan.”

For the first time since she’d arrived, Steve stiffened, his chin set as he spoke through  clenched  teeth.  “Ned  was  murdered.  I  can  feel  it  and  see  it.  He  was found at the bottom of his exercise pool.”

“Do you mean an infinity pool?”

“No,  an  exercise  pool.  It’s  much  smaller  than  a  regular  swimming  pool.  A steady  stream  of  water  pushes  against  the  swimmer  and  they  swim  against  the current.  It’s  the  same  principle  as  walking  on  a  treadmill.  You  can  even  adjust the current just like you can adjust the speed of a treadmill.”

“What did you mean when you said you can see it?”

“Say the name ‘Ned Logan.’”

She hesitated, but complied. “Ned Logan.”

“I see pale red.” He paused. “I don’t really see it, but my mind gives me the impression I’m seeing through a red lens.”

“I don’t understand.”

“It’s called associative chromesthesia. Certain sounds evoke colors. I had it before  I  lost  my  sight.  It’s  most  common  in  highly  creative  people—artists, composers and the like. I’m none of those, but I’m pretty good at crime. Seeing red  came  in  handy  when  we  couldn’t  determine  if  a  death  was  suicide  or homicide.  Leo  and  I  would  go  to  a  crime  scene  and  he’d  say  the  name  of  the victim. I’d either see a shade of red or nothing.”

“How do other people react when you tell them about this?”

“Most don’t believe it. That’s why Leo and I kept it quiet.”

“Are you sure about Ned’s death?”

“Pretty sure. I’ll know for certain when we go to Ned’s house. It helps for me to be in the place where the murder was committed.”

“Any other superpowers?”

Once again, he morphed into a relaxed, rather dowdy widower. “That’s it.”

She shifted on the sofa. Was this guy for real?  She’d have to check out this associative chromesthesia thing. He seemed to be waiting on her to continue so she asked, “Why is solving his murder so important to you?”

Even though they both knew he couldn’t see her, he turned to face her all the same. “To begin with, Ned was a straight arrow, as fine a man as I’ve ever met.

He was more than a friend, if you know what I mean.”

“Yeah. I think I do.” She paused. “What else?”

“Ned told me something a few years ago that I didn’t pay much attention to

at the time. He told me that if he died, he’d like for me to make sure his wife and kids were set up. I think I agreed to be executor of his estate. But he may have changed that because I haven’t heard from Kate yet.”

“Anything else?”

“Yeah. I went from wearing a gun and working twelve hours a day to sitting

in the dark with nothing to do and nobody to do it with. If I don’t get my mind and body in motion, I won’t be around much longer. I’ve tasted the barrel of my

.9 mm twice. What’s the old saying? Third time’s a charm?”

A pall settled over the room. To move the conversation forward Heather said,

“I suppose it’s my turn to tell you my deepest, darkest secrets. I’m sure you’ve concluded I come from a big pile of old Northeastern money.”

“I gathered as much.”

“Along with the money came certain… expectations. Chief among these was

the completion of an Ivy League education—Princeton.”

“Not Harvard?”

Heather breathed a sigh. “I needed to get out of Boston. Not all prisons have fences and bars.”

“I understand. Please continue.”

“After  graduating,  my  father  expected  me  to  take  a  cutting  off  the  money tree,  water  it  with  sixteen-hour  days,  fertilize  it  with  my  soul,  and  raise  an orchard of little money trees to full maturity. I was to continue the time-honored tradition of the rich getting richer.”

She expected a quip to come, but he only nodded.

“I was compliant in obtaining the education my father desired, but drew the

line  at  Wall  Street.  Too  many  of  my  classmates  became  addicted  to  Aderall, cocaine, and greed. Some have already burned out.” She paused. “Don’t get me

wrong. I have nothing against being rich. In fact, I prefer it. But, the relentless pursuit of  more  for the sake of  more would be like slicing away bits of my soul until there was nothing left.”

“What did your father say when you told him you wanted to become a cop?”

“He  laughed.  That  is,  he  laughed  at  first.  He  thought  it  was  a  naïve  girl’s flight of fancy that would soon run its course.”

“But  you  found  police  work  to  be  to  your  liking,  and  that  put  you  on  a collision course with him.”

“I  pacified  him  temporarily  by  pursuing  a  law  degree  while  I  worked  as  a patrol cop. Father became concerned when I passed the bar and made sergeant a week  later.  I  dug  my  heels  in  about  being  a  cop  and  it  resulted  in  quite  a  row.

That’s when he cut off my allowance. The transition from silver spoon to plastic fork  took  some  doing,  but  I  found  I  enjoyed  the  challenge  of  stretching  a paycheck.  When  I  received  the  promotion  to  detective,  he  became  more determined.”

“There’s  something  you’re  not  telling  me,”  said  Steve.  “Your  father  turned up the heat even more by getting you fired from the Boston P.D. Now he’s pulled strings  all  the  way  down  in  Houston  and  done  something  to  get  you  removed from the Academy.”

Heather  leaned  back  on  the  couch  and  looked  at  the  ceiling.  “I

underestimated his tenacity in tracking me and planting a false story. He seems to be intent on starving me into submission. He’s gone so far as to hire people to track  my  movements  to  make  sure  I’ll  be  dismissed  from  any  job  I  happen  to land.” She let out a soft giggle. “It’s all so silly of him. My grandparents on my

mother’s  side  left  me  an  inheritance  in  a  trust.  On  my  thirtieth  birthday  I’ll  be obscenely wealthy.”

“Your state of destitution is temporary?” asked Steve.

“Three  months  from  now  I’ll  be  in  a  position  to  purchase  this  townhome complex and dozens more like it.”

“But for three months, you need a place to live where you aren’t known or

bothered?  Then  you  can  reconcile  with  dear-old-Dad  on  your  own  terms.  And your terms will include solving crimes.”

Steve became silent for several long seconds. “It’s doable. There are details, of course, but nothing that can’t be overcome.”

“Like what?”

“You  need  to  disappear,  to  drop  completely  off  the  grid.  No  credit  or  debit cards,  no  checking  account—you  know  the  game  as  well  as  I  do.  The  spare bedroom of a middle-age, blind ex-cop is a place nobody would look.”

“So, you agree hiding here is a good plan? So far, we’re on the same page.”

Steve  continued,  “Considering  your  desperation,  I  don’t  think  this  next  one will be a deal breaker.”

Heather raised an eyebrow. “Hmm. Depends on what it is.”

“Nothing unseemly, I can assure you. Maggie was my one and only.” Steve

cleared his throat. “However, we will need to change your appearance from time to time. Unless I’m mistaken, you’re much too attractive not to notice. Luckily, that’s  easy  to  fix.  You  can  make  any  gorgeous  woman  ugly,  but  doing  the opposite is a lost cause.”

“I think I can handle a little role play.” Heather sighed. “I never thought I’d have to go into a self-imposed witness protection program.”

“Do you own a car?” asked Steve.

“A Porsche.”

“We’ll have to get something else.”

Heather  stood  and  began  to  pace.  “So,  if  you’re  just  looking  for  a  work partner, what are your expectations of me?”

Steve lowered his legs and cleared his throat. “I need your eyes and a way to get around. You have exceptional powers of observation and you can drive.”

Heather  hesitated,  but  not  for  long.  They  might  be  mismatched  roommates but both had needs, real needs, the other could meet. “So far I have no objections to this arrangement, but there are a couple of things on my end that might be a deal breaker.”

“What are they?”

She  dipped  her  head  and  lowered  her  voice  to  a  whisper.  “The  first  is money.”  Why  was  this  so  hard  to  say?  She  raised  her  chin  and  spoke  up.  “I’m down to my last hundred dollars. It took almost all I had to relocate. My father has been most effective in making sure I feel the pinch. I’ve been out of work for six months.”

“That’s  no  problem,”  said  Steve.  “I’ll  cover  room  and  board  and  pay  you enough to get you by until your ship comes in.”

“One more thing. Max has to come with me.”

Steve’s head jerked back. “You didn’t tell me you had a kid.”

Heather laughed. “He’s definitely my baby, but of the four-legged variety.”

“A dog?”

“Not exactly. Max is a lazy, lovable lap cat.”

Steve spoke through clenched teeth. “I hate cats.”

Heather  changed  the  subject  before  he  could  launch  into  a  diatribe  against cats. “When do we start going after Ned Logan’s killer?”

Steve  seemed  to  refocus  and  said,  “So  far  they’re  calling  it  a  suspicious death.  The  cops’ll  do  some  routine  investigating  but  won’t  be  real  interested until after the autopsy. The coroner’s always backed up. We should have about a week  to  wrap  things  up  before  we’re  told  to  butt  out.  I’ve  already  done  some work, but we need to interview the family tomorrow. Can you move in today?”

