“Money?” Frode said.
“He’s not rich, but he’s not starving. Income tax returns are
attached to the report. He has about 250,000 SEK in the bank,
in both a retirement fund and a savings account. He has an
account of around 100,000 kronor that he uses as cash for
working expenses, travel and such. He owns a co-op
apartment that’s paid off—700 square feet on
Bellmansgatan—and he has no loans or debts. He has one
other asset—some property in Sandhamn out in the
archipelago. It’s a cottage of 270 square feet, furnished as a
summer cabin and by the water, right in the most attractive
part of the village. Apparently an uncle of his bought it in
the forties, when such things were still possible for normal
mortals, and the cabin ended up in Blomkvist’s hands. They
divided things up so that his sister got the parents’
apartment in Lilla Essingen and Blomkvist got the cabin. I
have no idea what it might be worth today—certainly a few
million—but on the other hand he doesn’t seem to want to
sell, and he goes out to Sandhamn fairly often.”
“Income?”
“He’s part owner of Millennium, but he only takes out about
12,000 in salary each month. The rest he earns from his
freelance jobs—the total varies. He had a big year three years
ago when he took in around 450,000. Last year he only made
120,000 from freelance jobs.”
“He has to pay 150,000 in taxes in addition to lawyer’s fees,
et cetera,” Frode said. “Let’s assume that the total is rather
high. He’ll also be losing money while serving his gaol
term.”
“Which means that he’s going to be cleaned out,” Salander
said.
“Is he honest?”
“That’s his trust capital, so to speak. His image is to appear
as the guardian of robust morality as opposed to the
business world, and he is invited pretty regularly to
pontificate on television.”
“There probably isn’t much left of that capital after his
conviction today,” Frode said.
“I don’t want to claim that I know exactly what demands are
made on a journalist, but after this setback it will probably
be a long time before Master Detective Blomkvist wins the
Grand Prize for Journalism. He’s really made a fool of
himself this time,” Salander said. “If I may make a personal
comment…”
Armansky opened his eyes wide. In the years Salander had
worked for him, she had never made a single personal
comment in an investigation of an individual. Bone-dry facts
were all that mattered to her.
“It wasn’t part of my assignment to look at the question of
fact in the Wennerström affair, but I did follow the trial and
have to admit that I was actually flabbergasted. The thing
felt wrong, and it’s totally…out of character for Mikael
Blomkvist to publish something that seems to be so off the
wall.”
Salander scratched her neck. Frode looked patient.
Armansky wondered whether he might be mistaken or
whether Salander really was unsure how to continue. The
Salander he knew was never unsure or hesitant. Finally she
seemed to make up her mind.
“Quite off the record, so to speak…I haven’t studied the
Wennerström affair properly, but I really think that Mikael
Blomkvist was set up. I think there’s something totally
different in this story than what the court’s verdict is
indicating.”
The lawyer scrutinised Salander with searching eyes, and
Armansky noticed that for the first time since she began her
report, the client was showing more than a polite interest.
He made a mental note that the Wennerström affair held a
certain interest for Frode. Correction, Armansky thought at
once, Frode was not interested in the Wennerström affair—it
was when Salander hinted that Blomkvist was set up that
Frode reacted.
“How do you mean, exactly?” Frode said.
“It’s speculation on my part, but I’m convinced that
someone tricked him.”
“And what makes you think so?”
“Everything in Blomkvist’s background shows that he’s a
very careful reporter. Every controversial revelation he
published before was always well documented. I went to
court one day and listened. He seemed to have given up
without a fight. That doesn’t accord with his character at all.
If we are to believe the court, he made up a story about
Wennerström without a shred of evidence and published it
like some sort of journalistic suicide bomber. That’s simply
not Blomkvist’s style.”
“So what do you think happened?”
“I can only guess. Blomkvist believed in his story, but
something happened along the way and the information
turned out to be false. This in turn means that the source was
someone he trusted or that someone deliberately fed him
false information—which sounds improbably complicated.
The alternative is that he was subjected to such a serious
threat that he threw in the towel and would rather be seen as
an incompetent idiot than fight back. But I’m just
speculating, as I said.”
When Salander made an attempt to continue her account,
Frode held up his hand. He sat for a moment, drumming his
fingers on the armrest of his chair before he hesitantly
turned to her again.
